Known bugs:
-----------

Clone detection can give false warnings if a user connects and then signs
off several times in rapid succession.

Clone detection also goes off wrongly if a server links and has a number of
clients from the same hostname.

If there is absolutely no activity on your network, Services may delay
timed events (nick kills, database saving, etc.) until the next message
comes in from Services' uplink server.

On rare occasion, Services will crash when a user joins a channel.  The
cause of this bug is not yet known.

Attempting to JUPE the same server twice will cause Services to be
disconnected from its uplink server.

If Services receives a SIGHUP or SIGTERM signal while processing a command,
save_xx_dbase() may be called with the database in an inconsistent state.
This can under some conditions cause Services to crash while saving,
resulting in corrupt database files (though the backup files will still be
available).

When kicking users from forbidden channels (or other cases when a user
tries to join an empty channel and is kicked), Services will generate log
messages about "MODE +b for unknown channel".  These are harmless and can
be safely ignored.  The same messages can also appear during a netburst
when modes are sent for a channel after all the users in the channel have
been kicked.

When setting the language for another nick, Services will reply with the
language your nick is set to instead of the one you set for the other nick.
For example, if your nick is set to English, and you use "/msg NickServ SET
<othernick> LANGUAGE 2" to set another nick to German, the reply from
Services will still say "Language changed to English."  (Reported by
Coolkill121@aol.com)

If you are kicked and banned from a channel, you cannot get in with UNBAN
or INVITE even if you would normally have privileges to because ChanServ
reports that the channel does not exist.  (Reported by Finny Merrill
<griever@ircd-net.org>)

If you use an IRC server supporting forced nick changing (Dreamforge,
Bahamut, or Unreal), you have NSForceNickChange enabled, and you do not
have Q:lines for guest nicks on all of your servers, users can evade
Services' nickname and channel protection.  (Reported by Partizanu
<silvius@expres.ro>)

Services has been found to "freeze" for short periods of time (10-15
seconds) under very heavy load; cause unknown.
